= Renaming signal causes marks to be lost

xtUML Project Analysis Note

== 1 Abstract

User had a lot of pain because he renamed a signal and lost marks associated
with it because the mark is tied to the name and signature.  BP just silently
got rid of the associated marks So his stuff just stopped working and he didnâ€™t
know why

This comes from a Nov 17, 2018 discussion between One Fact and users about
high-priority items.

== 2 Introduction and Background

Project marks are associated with instances through the instance type and the
instance path key. For most elements, this is the fully qualified path of the
element including all of the package/component names to the element's location
and the element's name delimited by double colon (`::`). For activities, the
path key is defined by the element's signature and not its name. This is done to
support marking overloaded functions for MASL. Because of this, even the simple
act of adding a parameter causes the path key to be incorrect, breaking
downstream flow.

== 3 Requirements

=== 3.1 Element marks shall be updated when an edit causes the path key for the element to change.

== 4 Analysis

4.1 MASL rename refactor

The MASL refactor mechanism was analyzed as part of this work because it
performs a similar function to the behavior we are trying to achieve. With the
MASL refactor mechanism, registered listeners are invoked when an element is
renamed. The listeners are passed a model instance reference, an old name, and a
new name. This is a nice mechanism, however it is not enough for mark key
updating because of two problems. First, the old and new names are not enough to
update path keys since some elements may be identified by signature which is
much more complex than just the name. Secondly, other operations besides rename
can cause a path key to change (moving an element, adding an element, re-typing
an element, etc).

4.2 Transaction listeners

The BridgePoint framework utilizes a mechanism of so called "transaction
listeners" which are notified when transactions are started, finished, or
cancelled. Attached to transactions is information about the elements being
modified and a list of "model deltas" which represent the changes that have been
made to the model. Transaction listeners are registered with the transaction
manager in the "org.xtuml.bp.core" plugin.

4.3 Loading and persisting marks

There is a model of marking, however it is not generated to code with MC-Java.
Hand written code implements the marking editor dialog and the underlying data
structures. When invoked, the dialog loads marking data from disk and populates
the body of the dialog. When closed, the dialog information is used to create
new marks or update existing marks and then persisted to disk.

== 5 Work Required

5.1 Introduce a new transaction listener to the marking plugin

A new transaction listener could be introduced in the "org.xtuml.bp.ui.marking"
plugin. This listener would be registered on startup. When a new transaction is
started, the listener would load the marking data from disk (or ensure that it
is up to date in memory). Along with the data from the marking files, a
reference to the actual modeled instance would be held in the in memory
structure. When a transaction is finished, the in memory reference to the
markable element would be used to update the path key and the marks would be
persisted if any of the path keys were changed.

5.2 Factor out some of the common behavior

The `MarkingData` class would need to be modified to be a little more general
purpose and to include a reference to `NonRootModelElement` instances in the
`Mark` class. The `MarkingEditorDialog` class would need to be updated to handle
the use case where the marks are already loaded in memory before the dialog is
opened.

== 6 Acceptance Test

6.1 A set of test cases shall be defined in the design phase which adequately
exercise the use cases which can cause the issue to arise.

== 7 Document References

. [[dr-1]] https://support.onefact.net/issues/11555[#11555 - Renaming signal causes marks to be lost]

---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---
